ah this is not the end
uh it is not even the beginning of the
end but it is perhaps the end of the
beginning
well thank you to mr churchill and
welcome to episode
57 the beginning
chapter 18 of the beginning of infinity
titled
the beginning so i guess to be fair it
wouldn't be until next episode or the
episode after that
possibly when we get to the end of the
beginning
of the end of the beginning of infinity
or the end of the beginning which is the
chapter called the beginning which comes
at the end
of the beginning of infinity confused
but it is only the
end of the beginning of infinity so far
as i'm concerned because there are so
many more interesting things going on
with the beginning of infinity right now
and if you head over to naval ravikant's
channel on youtube n-a-v-a-l you can
find
the beginnings of a new podcast series
that's been out for a few weeks now
and we're planning on taking that on for
another many episodes i'm not sure
exactly how many
but this conversation that naval and i
had is being
put into podcast format and we're going
to have a number of these other
conversations as well
further unpacking the beginning of
infinity and perhaps trying to explain
it
in terminology that is even more
accessible than what i've been able to
do
here so go there and begin the beginning
of infinity explorations all over again
if you like and further also on naval's
channel there you can find
some conversations that i've had on this
new thing called clubhouse
there are links there to hour-long
conversations or more with myself and
naval and some other people exploring
the ideas that i've been talking about
here
so this is all just getting started and
there are some other projects in the
pipeline
that naval and i have that we're very
excited about in bringing to fruition
more beginning of infinity type themes
naval has a real beginning of infinity
mindset
he's one of these rare people in
business who has a contrarian mindset to
a large extent
contrarian about both the typical
academic culture
and the typical business culture as well
and so this comes together in his love
for the beginning of infinity because
these ideas are about the infinite
future which is something that naval
and david deutsch have converged upon
and it seems to be a wonderful
meeting of minds that's just commencing
now
so i'm looking forward to see what's
going to come of
the encounter between the ideas of naval
and the ideas of david deutsch
what kind of new people might be
inspired to
really take seriously what both of these
impressive people are saying
and it's just so appropriate today that
i am making this episode because
today sam harris the neuroscientist
podcaster
released another one of his making sense
podcasts and that is titled
food climate and pandemic risk
and there is some interesting solutions
in there about
the ethics of eating meat which i have
my own views on
but which i know many people are very
concerned about the possibility
that animals might be suffering in the
production of meat through factory
farming and so on
now there are interesting solutions that
sam is
interested in promoting about how to
artificially
create meat in the laboratory and i
think this is a great idea for a number
of reasons not
least of which is well it's just it's an
innovative idea and more power to people
who come up with
innovative ideas where there is a place
in the market where people
might be able to make a lot of money in
order to then go on and fund other
interesting innovative ideas
but more than that any of these kind of
ways in which we can figure out how to
more efficiently
i suppose create food and feed even more
people more cheaply then that's great
solving some of these problems of
poverty in certain places where
some people don't get enough of whatever
nutrient in their diet especially
protein in their diet and so if we can
do this
via some mass production method where
it's
cheaper ultimately in the long run
speaking then having to raise
cows and sheep and that old technology
of animals and instead have just
a factory pumping out steaks and pumping
out chicken fillets and pumping out your
lamb chops
then isn't that a wonderful idea that's
great that's fantastic so
but i bring it up because i listen to
the entirety
of the podcast and although there were
interesting and
optimistic ways in which technology
might be used in order to solve this
problem it was interesting that the
speakers
seemed at times to regret the fact that
it came down to a technological solution
that the technological solution was only
necessary because they couldn't find a
political way in order to persuade
everyone
that what they were doing was wrong in
this regards namely that we are all
terribly immoral we who eat meat or that
we aren't concerned or taken seriously
enough the existential threat
of climate change or that we simply
didn't have our
morals calibrated and precisely the
correct way
that these people thought that we should
and i i my last podcast the episode
before this
was just a kind of lighthearted to some
extent
exploration of existential risk
and the reason why it was light-hearted
was because
sometimes some of us do get frustrated
with
the identification of particular
problems
as being the way in which civilization
is going to go off the rails
but the thing is that if you know
there's a problem even if you have a
hint of there being a problem
then human beings will begin to course
correct they'll begin to correct their
errors
to the extent that they think it really
is an existential threat
and during the conversation that sam had
with his
guests they were really upset about the
fact that
the pandemic the covert 19 virus
pandemic
that happened through 2019 2020 and
throughout 2021
wasn't responded to sufficiently quickly
and they thought this was a cause for a
certain amount of despair
and that wasn't it a shame that people
didn't respond faster now on the one
hand i can kind of agree it's always
better if we can respond to any given
problem
faster than what we did so the suffering
is less
but i think the correct lens through
which to look at this pandemic is that
it was a pandemic that we solved faster
than any other pandemic hitherto that
has ever existed or affected people
before
that globally we managed to globally
coordinate this response and very very
quickly i thought
that the example of the way in which the
world
responded to covert 19 broadly speaking
was a cause for optimism a cause for
hope
a cause for thinking that should we
encounter this kind of thing again we'll
be able to respond even more quickly
that's the lesson of this that the
accelerating
rate at which human beings are able to
collaborate and come up with solutions
like vaccines is a cause for celebration
not despair
but this is just the usual mode in which
intellectuals public academics tend to
respond to any kind of problem as if
it's a source of despair that we didn't
find the solution quickly enough but
it's as if they don't know or
unaware of and simply forget that
problems are inevitable
problems will continue to happen all the
time and any one particular problem
that's been identified
there is a flip side to being concerned
about the fact that it might
cause our demise the flip side is hey we
actually identified this thing in time
because we should all of us be far more
concerned
about the thing we do not yet know about
about the problem that
is we are yet to encounter and so the
problems that we do know about
i think they are by virtue of the fact
that we know about them
are for all the more reason less likely
to wipe us out
at all and every day that goes by that
we're aware of this particular problem
it becomes less likely
that that particular problem is going to
in truth
be an existential threat to us that
insofar as
climate change could cause some some
sort of
economic catastrophe let alone
environmental catastrophe
the more that that becomes clear if it
becomes more clear perhaps it will be
turned over we don't know yet we don't
know exactly what the future will hold
but insofar as it continues to persist
to be a problem globally and to cause
environmental issues that scientists
seem to be able to agree and other
thinkers seem to be able to agree
is actually the cause of certain
problems that are happening right now
today for example certain weather events
uh
certain sea level rises certain declines
in agricultural production
i don't think there has been any
declines in agricultural production by
the way
just keeps on increasing that every day
that goes by
it is less likely that we will in the
face of this
just ignore it that the people of the
world will just continue to
so-called ignore it or so-called
downplayed i don't think they are if
anything
you know putting my cards on the table
at certain times i think there might be
a tendency to overreaction a tendency to
hysteria
and i think that can sometimes be
more of a problem than the problem
itself the hyperbole because
what the hyperbole does what hysteria
tends to do
is persuade no one it frightens a whole
bunch of people on the one hand
and it completely turns off a whole
bunch of other people on the other
because if your hysterical predictions
don't come true
within the time frame that you said that
they will then what does any reasonable
person do
in that situation when they're not
experts when they are lay people
well they tend to switch off from
listening to you in the future
even if you are an expert even if you're
a scientist
who is the best qualified person to
actually explain
what is likely to happen given this
particular scientific theory of
for example the climate and so it's not
that
we need to accept that sometimes
scientists get things wrong
and everyone needs to be taught that
it's that the scientists themselves
when making a prediction have to very
carefully calibrate the language they
use
surrounding that prediction and if they
say things like for example
all the dams are going to run out of
water by 2020
and we're all going to be in a serious
situation where we can't even find
drinking water this was said in
australia by the way by some experts
back in 2005 or 2010
and when that does not come to pass and
in fact we end up having floods
if the same experts turn around and say
well it's not the drought
that came due to climate change but
rather the floods in other words
any any set of weather events that occur
can be attributed to climate change it
is quite understandable
that people begin to switch off which
brings me to academics today of
all different stripes who make similar
noises about
the ways in which there's going to be
demise
on planet earth there's going to be
regression on planet earth there's going
to be technological demise there's going
to be
increasing amounts of starvation if we
don't do this or that
other thing that was somewhat hinted at
in the episode of making sense today
released april
6 2021 if you're interested in having a
listen to that
the idea was that if we didn't go down
the road of this particular solution
namely namely laboratory creation of
particular kinds of meat which i think
there's nothing
wrong with by the way but if we didn't
choose to go down that road
then there would be massive amounts of
starvation
this is the typical malthusian argument
namely that because there's a finite
amount of land
but the amount of people on the earth
continues to grow
logically speaking we can only support
so many people given the amount of land
but this has always been shown to be
false we have vertical farms now by the
way
i talked about that in another episode
vertical farming largely for the purpose
of
growing vegetables and plants but
there's no reason why you couldn't have
a vertical farm
of chickens and cows now of course i
know i understand the
animal rights people would be horrified
if we had a skyscraper full
of chickens and cows and sheep
but i'm just saying that this is the
kind of thing
where if only one solution is proposed
to be the solution to any particular
problem it leads to this pessimistic
idea
and this kind of authoritarian
totalitarianism
where the person with the purported
solution says if you do not enact my
solution
then things will go catastrophically
wrong it's an existential threat
but this is just a failure of
imagination on the part of
certain public intellectuals there will
always be human creativity which can
find
alternate solutions to particular things
and what does this have to do with
today's episode well the beginning
even though we continue to have people
who say
things look terrible for humanity things
are getting worse
if we don't solve this problem we're
going to go extinct
this has always been said there are very
few thinkers throughout
recent history who like david deutsch
have promoted the idea that
human creativity can and has been used
and will continue to be used
to solve the most pressing problems and
who've observed
that it is enlightenment ideas that have
existed for the last few centuries
they explain why things continue to get
better there's an explanation as to why
it's not merely a trend of getting
better now stephen pinker writes about
the trend and all the examples of how it
is that things have gotten better
it's not that it's inevitable that it
gets better but there is an underlying
explanation
about as the beginning of infinity lays
out for us a
culture of criticism of people
thinking of new ideas and being able to
think of new ideas because
they're free to think of these new ideas
they've been trained in a certain extent
educated in a culture that says it's
okay
to criticize these ideas not to say that
we couldn't do a lot
better on that front but we have begun
to reveal how it is that we generate new
ideas how we're able to innovate
and we have people who in real life
actually do this who innovate
who identify people who innovate like
naval ravikant
then isn't it all the more exciting and
wonderful that we actually
have a genuine concrete way
in which the beginning infinity can
inform our worldview
personally individually in terms of the
corporate world
and in terms of governments and other
kinds of institutions
that can explore the space of
possibilities in a positive optimistic
way without being
concerned and sidetracked about all the
ways in which
people are either the cause of the
problem people themselves are an evil in
some way
or that there is almost no hope and that
what we have to do
is to merely reduce the amount that
we're producing
reduce the amount of energy that we're
using concentrate
purely on efficiency gains wherever we
can because we're running out of
resources
which again was mentioned today we're
not running out of resources
we talked about that during the previous
chapter let's after this extremely long
introduction
get into the reading of the beginning
chapter 18 which is the final chapter
of the beginning let's go
and david begins with a quote from
isaac asimov in his book the
end of eternity published in 1955
where asimov wrote this is earth
not the eternal and only home of mankind
but only a starting point of an infinite
adventure
all you need do is make the decision to
end your static society
it is yours to make with that decision
came the end
the final end of eternity and the
beginning of infinity
and then david goes on to write the
first person to measure the
circumference of the earth
was the astronomer eratosthenes of
cyrene in the 3rd century bce
his result was fairly close to the
actual value which is around
forty thousand kilometers for most of
history
this was considered an enormous distance
but with the enlightenment that
conception
gradually changed nowadays we think of
the earth as small
this was brought about mainly by two
things first by the science of astronomy
which discovered titanic entities
compared with which our planet is indeed
unimaginably tiny and second by
technologies that have made worldwide
travel and communication commonplace
so the earth has become smaller both
relative to the universe
and relative to the scale of human
action okay just
pausing there is a little side comment
here
how did eratosthenes figure out the
circumference of the earth in like 200
bc
something like that so how he did it was
he had heard
purportedly he heard that there this
town called cyrene and in this town
called cyrene
in egypt there was a well and the well
one day during the year this well the
sun above it
cast no shadow it just shone straight
down into the world until you could see
the very bottom of the well
which is interesting and rare so rare it
only occurred one day of the year
purportedly now he wasn't in cyrene he
was in another
town city rather called alexandria
and in those days the the unit of
measurement was the stadia and so
the the distance between the place where
the well
was casting no shadow and alexandria
was about 5 000 stadia and so what
eratosthenes method
involved and school children do this now
was to you know take a
take a stick of some sort you know put
that in the ground
and then measure the length of the
shadow that that stick
cast at noon on that same particular day
the length of that shadow trigonometry
gives you a particular angle
at the time actually the angle the angle
that he got was about 7.2 degrees which
is about
1 50th of an entire circle
so he knew that if he knew the distance
from alexandria to
cyrene to cyen which he knew which he
knew
and and he got within a i think a few
percent of what the actual
value of the circumference of the earth
was okay back to the book
and david writes thus in regard to the
geography
of the universe and to our place in it
the prevailing world view has rid itself
of some parochial misconceptions we know
that we have explored most of the whole
surface of that formerly enormous sphere
but we also know that there are far more
places left to explore in the universe
and beneath the surface of the earth's
land and oceans than anyone imagined
while we still had those misconceptions
in regard to
theoretical knowledge however the
prevailing worldview has not yet
caught up with enlightenment values
thanks to the fallacy and bias of
prophecy a persistent assumption remains
that our existing theories
are at or fairly close to the limit of
what is knowable
that we are nearly there or perhaps
halfway there
as the economist david friedman has
remarked most people believe that an
income of about
twice their own should be sufficient to
satisfy any reasonable person
and that no genuine benefit can be
derived from amounts above that
as with wealth so with scientific
knowledge it is hard to imagine what it
would be like to know twice as much as
we do
and so if we try to prophesy it we find
ourselves just picturing the next few
decimal places of what we already know
even feynman made an uncharacteristic
mistake
in this regard when he wrote quote from
feynman
i think there will certainly not be
novelty say for a thousand years
this thing cannot keep going on so that
we are always going to discover more and
more new laws if we do it will become
boring that there are so many levels one
underneath the other
we are very lucky to live in an age in
which we are still making discoveries
it is like the discovery of america you
only discover it once
feynman the character of physical law
pause there just my reflection quickly
and no it's not like the discovery of
america at all
no no it's it's more akin i suppose
to the discovery that there are other
galaxies
now it used to be thought that the milky
way galaxy was the entirety of the
universe and then
it became clear that there were indeed
other galaxies islands of stars
just like our own far beyond the milky
way galaxy and once we
kind of realized that it gradually
became a realization to us
that there were just many many many more
galaxies hundreds of billions
perhaps an infinite number of galaxies
and in the same way
our theoretical knowledge our knowledge
of science and knowledge of philosophy
has no bottom to it there's no
final foundation that we can get to
every time we dig a little further and
find something
more and new and interesting we can ask
the question
why that and why is it that way and can
it be improved in some way and it can
it can but it is the rare person that
thinks so or takes seriously that idea
some people pay lip service to it and in
some modes appear to be
fallibilists or who believe in progress
but so many people the overwhelming
majority of people certainly the
overwhelming majority of public
intellectuals
think that as david just explained there
that we're almost there
that we're we're we're just about at the
end of physics or the end of
the end of science um as david is going
to come to
uh quite a quite a famous book called
the end of science by
john horgan about all the ways in which
progress must necessarily come to an
end in some way and these are the
sentiments of
a i would say a majority of physicists
that we've got for example the standard
model of the particle of particle
physics okay this is the
explanation of all the different
particles and the way in which they
interact one with another
and it seems as though many think
that we are just about there we might
have to find the
graviton okay the particle that is the
particle the smallest particle of
gravity
and then we'll just about have
everything and maybe we'll need a few
other particles as well but essentially
we're
almost there we're almost done or
perhaps it is that there's a
i i layer beneath the standard model
maybe it's string theory but once we
figure out what all the
modes of vibration of the particular
strings are then we'll be done and you
know that will be the end of
particle physics that'll be under the
fundamental physics this is why we have
michio kako releasing a book just very
recently
called the god equation and the god
equation is something that
even um paul davies talks about in his
books
which is the final equation the final
explanation so to speak
of fundamental physics about how all the
forces actually interact this is
supposed to be
the final theory of physics where at the
moment we've got a
unification and the physicists have
figured out
how to unify magnetism and electricity
so we have this
single force electromagnetism now and
then some smart people
figured out that well you can actually
unify another force called the
weak force the weak force is the force
that helps to
explain what's going on during
radioactive decay for example how you
can have
electrons coming out of the nucleus
interesting process
among other things and this weak force
can actually be united with
the electromagnetic force and so we have
the electro weak force and some people
won the nobel prize for figuring out the
electro weak force
and so what we have to do now is to
figure out well how do we unify the
strong nuclear force the force that
keeps the nucleus together with the
electro
weak force and once we have this we'll
have the electro weak strong force or
something like that
and this would be called a grand unified
theory
but that grand unified theory would
still be leaving out gravity
now we know from general relativity that
gravity is not a force however
these people who are kind of particle
physics fundamentalists
think that everything must be ultimately
constituted of particles
and so there must be a particle that
mediates the gravitational force even
though it's not a force
and when we have that then we'll have a
unification of the electro
weak strong force with gravity and that
will be a
so-called theory of everything and david
talks about that right the beginning of
the fabric of reality as well
that this wouldn't be a theory of
everything because you could always ask
why
does it have that form that it does
there would be layers beneath that there
would be no end to
you know trying to understand physics
once we have this so-called syria of
everything if indeed it's possible to
have a theory of everything
so far all attempts via this route to
continue to unify the forces
to unify these forces with gravity have
failed
but let's go back to the book and david
writes
among other things feynman forgot that
the very concept of a law
of nature is not cast in stone as i
mentioned in chapter 5
this concept was different before newton
and galileo and it may change again
the concept of levels of explanation
dates from the 20th century
and it too will change if i am right
then as i guessed in chapter 5
there are fundamental laws that look
emergent relative to microscopic physics
more generally the most fundamental
discoveries have always and will always
not only consist of new explanations but
new modes of explanation
as for being boring that is merely a
prophecy that criteria for judging
problems will not evolve as fast as the
problems themselves
but there is no argument for that other
than a failure of imagination
even feynman cannot get around the fact
that the future is not yet imaginable
just on this uh pausing there just my
reflection on this
just on this distinction between
fundamental and emergent and it's my
reading of
david deutscher's work that's made me
think these two concepts are not
really at odds there can be emergent
laws in other words
laws that come from the outworkings of
the laws of physics
or principles that come from the
outworkings of the laws of physics they
emerge from but they're still
fundamental
in other words fundamental but that we
consider appear in many
different fields in the explanations of
many different kinds of disparate
phenomena
now take for example evolution by
natural selection that process
neo-darwinism if you like this this
process of where
the the selfish gene survives and tends
to get itself replicated
that is a fundamental law
but it's also emergent it's both
fundamental and emergent these two
things do not have to be
do not have to contradict one another it
is required in order to explain
all of biology one one would would dare
say
and so it is fundamental within that
domain and it may be even more
fundamental than that we don't know
but the thing is it certainly had merged
it emerged from
well it came after the big bang it came
after
you know once we had complex chemistry
it emerged somehow
out of that we don't know exactly how
how the process arose
but the process did arise it did emerge
from fundamental physics but itself
is fundamental for all we know the laws
of physics
mandate that evolution by natural
selection must obtain
also my favorite example of this is
the existence of people and what a
person is
a person is fundamentally important
in the technical sense of fundamental
namely that they have
effects upon every other domain
that is conceivable in principle they
have
effects upon planets they can uh have an
effect on chemistry they have an effect
certainly an effect on
ecosystems and biology they have an
effect on how
knowledge is created in fact they are
unavoidably
necessary in the explanation of how
explanatory knowledge arises you need to
have a person there
and so i'm starting to think that people
are really deeply fundamental
to the cosmos maybe not human beings but
people and maybe the laws of physics are
such
that no matter how if you rewound the
type of the universe that you
consistently get people arising i don't
know there doesn't appear to be
evidence for that but here's a
philosophical argument that that might
be the case because
at the moment we human beings being the
only people that we know of
appear to have this effect on
every other physical system that we're
aware of
to some extent every other physical
system on the planet that we're aware of
to some extent eventually
we're going to have effects on every
physical system in the solar system
the galaxy and so on so people are
fundamental
in a deep sense but at the same time of
course we're emergent
we've we're very very emergent we're one
of the most emergent structures
that exists as well but still
fundamental
okay and just on the idea of new modes
of explanation so
a mode of explanation would be something
like well prior to
evolution by natural selection this idea
that
things can compete one with another and
one can be
more fit in a particular environment and
cause itself to be replicated
uh more frequently than another which
might die out
this in the unit of the selection in
this case is a gene but
it wasn't always known to be a gene it
was thought to be maybe a
particular individual in a species so on
and so forth
this is a new mode of explanation no one
had thought of that way of explaining
things
prior to evolution by natural selection
but you know eventually that that mode
of explanation
is probably a precondition is a is a
precondition in some sense
to popper's own idea about how
knowledge is created and knowledge tends
to spread it's not a perfect analogy but
there is a that's a it's within that
same
similar mode of explanation but poplar
of course applies it to the
abstract ideas of knowledge
whereas darwin of course was was
applying it to the very physical
very physical existence of species
okay back to the book david writes
shedding that kind of parochialism is
something that will have to be done
again and again in the future
a level of knowledge wealth computer
power or physical scale that seems
absurdly huge in any given instant
will later be pathetically tiny yet we
shall never reach anything like an
unproblematic state
like the guests at infinity hotel we
shall never
be nearly there there are two versions
of nearly there
in the dismal version knowledge is
bounded by the laws of nature or
supernatural decree
and progress has been a temporary phase
though this is rank pessimism by my
definition it has gone under various
names including optimism
and has been integral to most world
views in the past
pause there my reflection integral to
perhaps
most world views in the present i would
say as well
as david goes on to say quote he writes
in the cheerful version all remaining
ignorance will soon be eliminated or
confined
to insignificant areas this is
optimistic in form
but the closer one looks the more
pessimistic it becomes in substance
in politics for instance utopians
promise that a finite number of already
known changes
can bring about a perfected human state
and that is a well-known recipe for
dogmatism
and tyranny pause just to unpack that
so he says that utopians
in in the political sense promise that a
finite number
of already known changes can bring about
a perfected human state
and that is well-known recipe for
dogmatism and tyranny yes so so anytime
you hear
any of the ways in which to organize
society that will provide
a final answer to
suffering and um to uh
human wants okay which is
let's just pick on communism communism
purports to be the system
where everyone will get their fair jew
and that will be the end of it it'll
bring about a kind of perfected human
state this marxist idea
and so therefore you need to do what you
can to implement this and that leads to
dogmatism and tyranny unlike the
alternative view
the alternative view is just freedom
allowing people to pursue
their own happiness and wealth and we
don't expect
there to be perfection at any point we
expect
just gradual incremental improvement far
better than stasis far better than this
idea that we have
the final utopian view where
everyone will have what they need to the
extent they need it
and so you know this utopian ideal is
perfectly summarized by
you know karl marx karl marx comes up
with this this this
this quip um from each according to his
ability
to each according to his needs and so
the idea there that
you know the the the communist regime
would
solve the problem of how to fairly and
equally distribute
goods and services and capital and so on
and so everyone will have enough
enough for their needs
but you will have never have enough for
your needs you will always have
more needs and that's a great thing you
will always change your mind your
interests you will always
need more and that's a really good thing
you will always want to improve
your computer your car the kind of food
that you use
the the the fashion you you're you're
interested in
the the kind of entertainment you pursue
these needs uh should be unending in
their
change in the way in which they adapt
according to
people's new inventions and so there can
be no
final solution to what people's needs
are and and people with these
kinds of political ideas think that as
david says there's just
a finite number of steps in order to get
us there we'll just change this we'll
change that we'll change that
and then we'll instantiate this perfect
society
this perfect way of organizing people so
that they have
precisely what they need but they can't
be given precisely what they need and
there won't there shouldn't be a
finite number of changes because we know
that we need to change all the time we
need to be able to
adapt and be fast in our adaptation
given that the problems that will come
are always unpredictable inevitable and
we don't know what direction they're
coming from so we need to allow them the
agility to change whatever they're doing
at any given point in time
their needs will change at any given
point in time as well
all right back to the book david writes
in physics imagine that lagrange had
been right that the system of the world
can only be discovered once
or that mickelson had been right that
all physics still undiscovered in 1894
was about the sixth place of decimals
they were claiming to know
that anyone who subsequently became
curious about what underlay that system
of the world
would be inquiring futilely into the
incomprehensible
and that anyone who ever wondered at an
anomaly and suspected that
some fundamental explanation contained a
misconception would be mistaken
mikkelsen's future our present would
have been lacking in explanatory
knowledge to an extent that we can no
longer easily imagine
a vast range of phenomena already known
to him such as
gravity the properties of the chemical
elements and the luminosity of the sun
remained to be explained he was claiming
that these phenomena would only ever
appear as a list of facts or rules of
thumb to be memorized
but never understood or fruitfully
questioned every such frontier of
fundamental knowledge that existed in
would have been a barrier beyond which
nothing would ever be amenable to
explanation
there will be no such thing as the
internal structure of atoms no dynamics
of space and time no such subject as
cosmology no explanation for the
equations governing gravitational
electromagnetism
no connections between physics and the
theory of computation
the deepest structure in the world would
be an inexplicable
anthropocentric boundary coinciding with
the boundary of what the physicists of
thought they understood and nothing
inside that boundary
like say the existence of a force of
gravity would ever turn out to be
profoundly false
pause there just my reflection and so
it's true today again
we can look back now and kind of
giggle at how silly mikkelsen must have
been
after all as we learned in the book and
as any student of physics and tell you
mickelson was one of the people who
helped to popularize the idea of
relativity by by albert einstein the
mickelson-morley experiment
which was an attempt to detect the
luminous
luminiferous ether the the movement of
the earth through this luminiferous
ether which was
required for prior theories about light
prior to uh will einstein's special
relativity
prior to this they they thought well
light's a wave and it needs a particular
medium to move through that
that that that material is the
luminiferous ether
so mikkelson himself was instrumental in
many ways experimentally
helping to refute other theories in
favor of einstein's own
theory of general theory of special
relativity and so
he himself even though he thought
physics was all tied up into a nice neat
bundle
was one of the people who showed that in
fact it wasn't you know and i think
and david will come to this in the
chapter as well that now
more than any other time is
quite all it seems quite obvious that
we don't know everything there are just
so many problems that
seem to point to deep issues with
our most fundamental theories across the
board
it's not to say that they're in wrong in
all parts
in the same way that newton's theory of
universal gravitation wasn't wrong in
all its parts
but it contained misconceptions and so
we must think now
that our greatest theories themselves
contain misconceptions as
david also says wouldn't it be wonderful
if we just agreed to call
our scientific theories scientific
misconceptions that our best
misconception at the moment is
about gravity is the general theory of
relativity others have been falsified
but this misconception has not yet
but right now right now we have serious
problems i mean
why do galaxies rotate at the rate that
they do
we don't know we postulate this thing
called dark matter
and the best explanation seems to be
well it has to be a kind of matter
it must be because we know of no other
thing no other entity
that can create gravitation but purely
speculating it could be the case that
some of that some of these very clever
scientist physicists who are saying well
maybe maybe just maybe general theory of
relativity is the problem
and if we solved whatever the problem
was with general relativity coming up
with a new theory of gravitation
we would solve these galaxy rotation
curves among other things among other
reasons
for thinking that dark matter exists or
this phenomena
that seems to be causing these anomalous
observations
which we call dark matter could be
solved by another theory of gravity so
we have this problem of dark matter
that's one thing
another issue is of course and we'll
come to this i won't say too much about
it
dark energy why is the universe
expanding at an accelerating rate we
don't know
this is a could be a very serious
problem
for the foundations for the fundamentals
of physics why does
quantum theory say that things are
discrete and
general relativity says that things are
continuous what is the
fundamental deepest nature of reality in
in truth is it discrete or continuous is
it a third thing that
doesn't fit into either of those
categories that could be interesting
i doubt it and many people have
physicists have been
trying things like string theory
uh similarly without success in physics
so far
we have lee smolen who talks about loop
quantum gravity and maybe that's that's
an avenue that
that might reveal something about the
deep nature of gravity and how it can be
combined with quantum theory maybe david
deutsch and
kiara maletto who work on constructor
theory among other people
maybe they have an avenue towards a
quantum theory of gravity or a new way
of unifying these things
there are mysteries are plenty within
physics and so we could we could talk
about all the all the things that we
don't know
in physics right now what is the nature
of consciousness what is the what is the
the geometry
of the multiverse uh what effect
would a quantum theory of gravity have
for the quantum theory of computation
would there be any effect at all
i don't know why do why do the
constants of nature have the value that
they do this is one thing that i'm very
curious about i know some people are
working on this they have to find the
so-called fine-tuning problem i don't
think there is a satisfactory answer
for these things maybe there is a
megaverse out there again
another open question in cosmology
and physics let's go back to the book
nothing very important would ever be
discovered in the laboratory
that mickelson was opening each
generation of students who studied there
instead of striving to understand the
world more deeply than their teachers
could aspire to nothing better than to
emulate them or at best
to discover the seventh decimal place of
some constant whose sixth
was already known but how the most
sensitive scientific instruments today
depend on fundamental discoveries made
after 1894.
their system of the world would forever
remain a tiny frozen island of
explanation
in an ocean of incomprehensibility
mickelson's
fundamental laws and facts of physical
science instead of being the beginning
of an infinity of further understanding
as they were in reality
would have been the last gasp of reason
in the field
i doubt that either lagrange or
mickelson thought of himself as
pessimistic
yet their prophecies entailed the dismal
decree that no matter what you do
you will understand no further it so
happens that both of them had made
discoveries which could have led them to
the very progress whose possibility they
denied
they should have been seeking that
progress should they not
but almost no one is creative in fields
in which they are pessimistic
pause there my reflection well let's
just take that seriously
almost no one is creative in fields in
which they are pessimistic you can take
that as a
personal injunction to be optimistic if
you want to
be successful don't be pessimistic don't
think that you can't make a difference
don't think that you can't contribute
you can and you should try and it's only
by accepting that as a
precondition to making progress thinking
that you can make progress
thinking that you can be creative that
you will okay this
idea that progress must stop at a
particular point
is a good barrier
to you making progress okay let's keep
going
david writes i remarked at the end of
chapter 13
that the desirable future is one where
we progress from
misconception to ever better less
mistaken misconception
i have often thought that the nature of
science would be better understood
if we called theories misconceptions
from the outset instead of only after we
have discovered their successes
thus we could say that einstein's
misconception of gravity was an
improvement
on newton's misconception which was an
improvement on kepler's
the neo-darwinian misconception of
evolution is an improvement on darwin's
misconception
and his on la marx if people thought
like that perhaps no one would need to
be reminded that science claims neither
infallibility
nor finality perhaps a more practical
way of stressing the same truth
would be to frame the growth of
knowledge or knowledge
not only scientific as a continual
transition
from problems to better problems rather
than from problems to solutions
or from theories to better theories this
is the positive conception of
problems that i stressed in chapter one
thanks to einstein's discoveries
our current problems in physics embody
more knowledge than einstein's own
problems did
his problems were rooted in the
discoveries of newton and euclid while
most problems that preoccupy physicists
today are rooted in
and would be inaccessible mysteries
without the discoveries
of 20th century physics the same is true
in mathematics
although mathematical theorems are
rarely proved false once they have been
around for a while
what does happen is that mathematicians
understanding
of what is fundamental improves
abstractions that are originally studied
in their own right are understood as
aspects of more general abstractions
or related in unforeseen ways to other
abstractions and so progress in
mathematics also goes from problems to
better problems
as does progress in other fields just
pausing there just my reflection
the a mathematician's apology that great
book
written by g h hardy about his meeting
with
uh ramanujan the other great
mathematician i i remember in
in that book he quite proudly and i
think he famously he
he would refer to the impractical nature
of the pure mathematics that he did
so so even the meta mathematical point
you know the mathematicians
who create mathematics thinking it
definitely has
no practical application sometimes
surprised there is a
deeper understanding and in fact the
mathematics does indeed connect
to physical reality now this is
different of course to the idea that
there can be mistakes made in
mathematics and just because of course
a theorem is rarely proved false in
mathematics once it's been proved it's
really shown
to in fact be an error that doesn't mean
that it can't be
okay as as david as it pains to say
and that's a subtle point that from the
fabric of reality
and i love to quote this part of the
fabric of reality where he says that
necessary truth is the subject matter of
mathematics
necessary truth is not the reward we get
for doing mathematics which is the
difference between
necessary truth is the subject matter
it's the thing that we're looking at in
mathematics
but our knowledge of that which is what
mathematicians are engaged in they're
engaged in
conjecturing ideas they're engaged in
creating knowledge about
this domain which we call the domain of
necessary truth
and so they're coming to try and
understand what necessary truths are now
when they
produce a theorem you know pythagoras
theorem and they say c squared equals a
squared plus b squared
i say this is a theorem well we can have
new understandings of that namely when
pythagoras
proved this or when whoever whoever did
first come up with this maybe it was
pythagoras maybe it wasn't
this c squared equals a squared plus b
squared seems to be a thing that applies
not only in the physical world but it's
just
incontrovertible there's no way in which
we could ever get around this but
but of course it's a special case that
works in uh
three dimensions now i think back in the
greek times i don't
know if they thought of four five six n
different spatial dimensions and so you
could have a variant
of pythagoras theorem that operates in
different dimensions not to say that
pythagoras theorem is wrong
but we're wrong to think that it applies
universally in
all possible mathematical areas okay
let's just go back to the book
and i'll read just a little more for
today we're going to spread this final
chapter out i think to
a few different parts david writes
optimism and reason are incompatible
with the conceit that our knowledge is
nearly there in any sense or that its
foundations are
yet comprehensive optimism has always
been rare and the lure
of the prophetic fallacy strong but
there have always been exceptions
socrates famously claimed to be deeply
ignorant and paparate
i believe that it would be worth trying
to learn something about the world
even if in trying to do so we should
merely learn
that we do not know much it might be
well for us all to remember that
while differing widely in the various
little bits we know
in our infinite ignorance we are all
equal
end quote that was from conjectures and
refutations published in 1963 by karl
popper
just emphasizing again in our infinite
ignorance
we are all equal there is an infinite
amount
that all of us do not know and are
utterly ignorant of and we're all the
same in that we just
happen to have little bits of
specialized knowledge
einstein had specialized knowledge of
physics
popper had specialized knowledge of
epistemology
lavoisier had specialized knowledge of
chemistry we can keep on going
people sitting at home might have
specialized knowledge of
soccer or football or netball or art we
our own families we have specialized
knowledge and
we just differ in those little bits of
specialized knowledge that we have
but we're all infinitely ignorant
there's
there's an infinite amount that we don't
know and that will always be the case
just the last paragraph david writes
there he says quote
infinite ignorance is a necessary
condition for there to be
infinite potential for knowledge
rejecting the idea that we are nearly
there
is a necessary condition for the
avoidance of dogmatism stagnation and
tyranny
end quote and the reading there for
today because david's about to
launch into a description of
is his frenemy john hogan the end of
science which is basically the
counterpoint
to the beginning of infinity and in fact
john hogan did a
an interview with david deutch and i got
on very well and they spoke
um all about the beginning of infinity
and i don't know i don't think uh john
hogan has ever changed his mind he's
been on clubhouse recently and he's
talked about things like well he's
in in this book amongst other articles
he um
he seems to get poppa quite wrong he
seems to get the physics
quite wrong so essentially it may make a
lot of errors which of course leads him
to
conclude that science is just about
ready to be finished because he thinks
that
i suppose that our scientific theories
aren't
grand misconceptions and that we're
replacing one misconception with the
other
and when we read that earlier on let me
just
go back and and read what david says
david says that the desirable future is
the one where we progress
from misconception to ever better less
mistaken misconception
and so he's talking there about how um
we correct we're correcting errors and
we're refuting
what we hitherto regarded as our best
theory
we would we we change our minds in light
of new evidence
and we find a new theory but that theory
we must expect also contains
misconceptions
now does this mean that just everything
is on equal footing as containing
as being misconceptions no no because
we're finding some amount of truth now
we can't quantify we can't measure away
this amount of truth
all we can say is we've corrected errors
we've we've removed some misconceptions
we've we've removed some of the mistakes
some of the errors
and so we then have something else
itself not perfect and it will never be
perfect it's just that we're
refining things we're improving things
we're making
progress away from utter and complete
falsehood
towards the ontological truth towards a
description of reality which is more
accurate
now we can't quantify this all we can
say is
this theory is better than that theory
and that theory was better than that
theory in this theory
c is better than b which it succeeded
and better than a
which is the first one that we came up
with our first best guess
and b was better and now we're at c and
we expect there to be a d
e f and we're going to get to z and then
we'll have to start all over again with
a
a and a b and a c and so on you get what
i'm saying
there is no end to this process of error
correction
and moving from misconception to better
misconception
a less mistaken misconception the
wonderfully
positive vision which means that we'll
never get to the end of science and
instead we are at
the beginning of infinity and we're
moving towards the end of the beginning
of infinity
but not yet we have i would say
at least two more episodes left here
and in the meantime if you're waiting
for more and you just can't wait to hear
more about the beginning affinity
go to david deutsch's website david
deutch dot org dot uk
and from david deutsch dot org dot uk
you can find links to
for example constructor theory and the
constructor theory
material at constructortheory.org
has a lot of talks and interesting
papers
with david talking with the various
other people talking about
that beginning of infinity okay that may
very well be a beginning of infinity the
the
the constructor theory of information
and
this new approach to the fundamental
laws of physics
and if you want still more go to naval
and if you just put into your browser
nav dot a-l and that will take you to
his website where his podcast is and
as myself and naval having conversations
there
very short very short conversations
that will continue for for well the
indefinite future
so um yes you can go there and you can
hear the conversation going on there as
i say if you type in
naval naval rabbicat into youtube you
will also find
some conversations some more lengthy
conversations i've done with him
on clubhouse recently about these same
issues
but until next time bye
[Music]
um
ah
[Music]
up